Preface:I'm 70, I retired at 58. Though my career was in IT and long and varied including as a prolific software developer, net admin, sys admin, security admin and senior IT management, I haven't done anything in IT (other that as a user of a cell phone and chromebook) for over a decade. And my dev period was during the DOS, BASIC, VB, VBA era and most of it was before the internet and web dev was a thing. So I'm a "has been" but not a "never was". So I'm new to web dev, html, java, hosting services, Github, Git etc. So this is efectively my "hello world" equivalent. I'm sure I'm not following established conventions in anything here, including what is actually supposed to be in a readme these days. All this to say apologies in advance! You've got the context now to help you understand WTH?...
Version 1. A very simple Gemini AI (as available freely on 20251202) created webapp to display device (eg. cell phone) speed as last 10 second average and last 30 second average. Purpose is to see how changes to sheeting, helm, heading, etc. affect sailboat speed. I'm an older (70) sailor, I don't see as well as I used to and wanted something that would give me easily visible feedback (aka large, bold) on sailing speed as I make changes to sheeting, helm position, heading, balance, etc. I've sailed thousands of hours and miles over the years and always wanted something like this. Speed as reported by many wonderfully useful apps like Google Maps isn't terribly useful when displayed so small on your phone you can't see it because you're near sighted and your reading glasses are stored safely down below and because gps fixes aren't precise enough at the slow speeds of sailboats to be very useful for calculating speed per second - several seconds are needed to get accurate numbers. Further, the changes made while sailing might take several seconds to have their full impact - heavy displacement sailboats have a lot of momentum relative to thrust. Having multiple averages over different time intervals also helps gauge other factors affecting speed like changes in wind speed (gusts), wind direction, chop encountered, wakes, etc.
Version 2. Version 1 didn't actually work in that there was no speed displayed. Getting back to Gemini it essentially said, "Well duh, of course it didn't actually work, I gave you the standard answer but in the real world position.coords.speed doesn't return anything in most implementations for a variety of reasons that we have no control over (aka security, resource utilization inside a browswer, etc.) (So interesting that it gives you advice that IT KNOWS in retrospect won't work, and we discussed this after the fact and that was interesting too but that's not what this readme is about.) So this version is essentially the same thing except that we're (I use the term very loosely, Gemini is doing ALL the coding, I'm just prompting it) calculating speed based on last two gps coordinates. With some filtering added to reject coords that appear outside of likely bounds, right now just those that show a velocity either too low or too high 0-7 knots) for my usecase. (I sail a Cape Dory 25D so theoretical hull speed is 5.84 knots. But "surfing" can happen so I'm using 7 as a reasonable upper for now. I've suggested a physics threshold be used too, such that some accelerations are recognized as unrealistic and should be discarded. That might appear in the next version. (And unless it happens automatically without me having to set it up in Github, the only actual versioning happening here is my notes inside this readme. I'm just about to replace the existing index.html from v1 with the version as described here that I'm calling version 2.0.
